Occupying the southeastern edge of the
Arabian Peninsula, seven traditional
emirates spanning from the Rub Al Khali Desert
to the Western Hajar Mountains united into an
extraordinary federation. When Britain announced
its withdrawal from the Gulf in 1971, the rulers
of Abu Dhabi and Dubai first established
a bilateral union for mutual protection,
then extended invitations to the neighboring
Emirates to join their alliance, creating what
is today known as the United Arab Emirates.
Spanning across the eastern outcrop of the
Arabian Peninsula as a jagged crescent, the
image of this union is often reduced to just a
lot of sand and empty space. While this perception
isn’t entirely inaccurate, around and underneath
the endless sand dunes and salt flats, there
are a lot more geographical nuances which we
will have a closer look at in this video.
Since it is the most prominent feature of
the Emirates, we will start our journey in
the Rub Al Khali desert before moving along
the coast to then finish our journey in the
eastern mountains at the Gulf of Oman.
The most striking and omnipresent feature of the
Arabian Peninsula is certainly the Arabian Desert,
whose southernmost and most desolate section is
the Rub Al Khali, Arabic for "The Empty Quarter".
The vast expanse remains virtually devoid of
life both in its Saudi heartland and where it
extends across the border into the Emirates,
which explains why so little attention has been
paid to precisely demarcating the border
between the two countries in this region.
The Treaty of Jeddah, drafted with Saudi
Arabia shortly after the UAE's establishment,
was intended to formalize the federation's
borders. While the parties reached broad
agreement on most territorial claims,
significant uncertainties remain,
with the UAE maintaining that the final written
treaty differed substantially from the verbal
agreements reached during negotiations. Allegedly,
the written demarcation shifts the entire boundary
5 to 15 kilometers northeastward in Saudi Arabia's
favor, which is why the UAE hasn’t ratified the
agreement to this day. On first glance, the land
in question might seem of little value, were it
not for the vast oil deposits found just south
of Saudi Arabia’s claimed border. Since the 70s,
the UAE has tried to get Saudi Arabia back to the
negotiating table to address these discrepancies,
but not much progress has been made and it remains
a contentious topic between the two nations.
Surrounding this Shaybah Oil field, now maintained
by Saudi Arabia, topographic mapping reveals
a dramatic shift in the landscape's relief
compared to the otherwise monotonous desert,
with up to 300 meter tall dunes towering over
the salt pans. To an even bigger surprise,
the northern boundary of this dune field is
also bustling with life and development that
seemingly defies the region’s harsh natural
constraints. Spanning a 120 kilometer long
crescent around the giant sandbox, an ancient
aquifer allows for date palm plantations,
which has led to a population explosion in recent
decades. The Liwa Oasis has been populated for
centuries now and is actually the home region
of Abu Dhabi's ruling family, but only with
advancements in well technology has this level of
development become feasible here. The excessive
growth doesn’t come without its downsides though
and today the roughly 40.000 inhabitants spread
over 50 villages are living well above their
means when it comes to the water reserve.
An unconfined clay basin around 110 meters
underground has collected monsoon rains
from around 9 to 6 thousand years ago, but since
then, there has been virtually no replenishment.
of the aquifer.
Realizing this discrepancy in the water balance but
not wanting to give up on the primary agricultural
zone of the country, the Abu Dhabi government
is keen on artificially sustaining the aquifer.
Massive pipelines have been constructed for this
purpose, which channel excess desalinated water
from the coastal plants into the hinterland of
the UAE, attempting to sustain the water table.
Nevertheless, the scale of extraction far outpaces
replenishment and the projection of even more
growth in the region makes this project but a token
gesture against the harsh hydrological reality.
Beyond the underground aquifers, life is harsh
in the Rub al Khali Desert, with only a handful
of plant and animal species able to tolerate the
extreme aridity. Summer temperatures in the desert
frequently reach highs of 48° Celsius or 113°
Fahrenheit and regular Sharqi Wind in spring
and autumn suspend sand and dust into kilometer
tall towers that sweep across the desert. Among
the few mammals adapted to these conditions is
the Arabian Oryx, once hunted to near extinction
but now making a steady recovery within a large
protected reserve along the desert's outskirts.
Most of the UAE’s fauna is not found on land but
rather along the sandy shoreline and surrounding
the many islands in the Persian Gulf. The high
temperatures which make the land barely habitable
are also threatening the ocean health, but many
hundreds of species have adapted to the water
temperature exceeding 36° on a regular basis.
Especially in front of the coast of Abu Dhabi,
4% of the global seagrass meadows can be
found, covering nearly all areas of the
nearshore seabed. As the preferred habitat of the
Dugong and hundreds of fish species, they also
provide a substantial carbon sink in regional
soil. Complementing these underwater meadows,
the UAE's coastline is also distinguished by
extensive mangrove forests that are locally known
as Qurm. These salt-tolerant trees, covering over
4,000 hectares nationally, create dense coastal
woodlands that serve as nurseries for marine life
and natural barriers against coastal erosion.
Like many marine habitats though, the changing
climate and warming waters are challnénging the
balance of this biosphere, but the mangroves
and seagrass meadows are far from
the most threatened coastal habitat of the UAE.
This unfortunate status goes to the coral reefs
scattered along the UAE's shoreline and around its
Gulf islands. When mapping of coral reefs started
in the 1960s, the coastal waters of the UAE were
renowned for their dense reefs spanning hundreds
of hectares and high percentage of alive corals
exceeding 60%. As time progressed and the oceans
warmed however, the habitats have been decimated,
and in 1998 they experienced another devastating
blow. During an extreme El Niño event, the Persian
Gulf temperatures reached unprecedented levels,
exceeding 37°C for extended periods, which led to
70% of the remaining corals expelled their symbiotic
algae in a process called coral bleaching.
To counteract this ecological collapse, the
UAE has launched an ambitious coral restoration
project, installing artificial reef modules
along much of the northwestern coastline. These
structures are seeded with coral fragments from
the most heat-resistant species,
cultivated in specialized nurseries in the UAE.
While these restoration efforts represent genuine
attempts to address the environmental damage,
they also serve broader strategic interests
that extend beyond ecological conservation.
The discussion of UAE geography would
be incomplete without examining the oil
wealth that fundamentally transformed this region,
and of course the story of how they are trying
to diversify away from this finite resource.
Starting in the 1950s, the first major oil
deposits were discovered in the desert of
Abu Dhabi, and its revenue has almost instantly
revolutionized the urban landscape and influence
of the UAE. The wealth has been used for ambitious
infrastructure projects and lavish skylines
but the government is aware that the oil
sources and global needs of oil are finite.
Since then, the UAE has spent hundreds of
billions of US dollars to diversify the
country's industries, with tourism emerging
as one of the cornerstones of the strategy,
which explains the immense investments
put into the coral reefs for example.
Looking at the geographical distribution
of global oil reserves reveals just how
fortunate the emirates are positioned on
the world map, with nearly 6% of the global
oil reserves being contained in the 0.05% of
the global land area that the UAE occupies.
Most of the oil is located in the Zakum oil
field approximately 80 kilometers offshore
of the capital Abu Dhabi and many smaller oil fields
like the Umm Shaif, the Bu Hasa and the Habshan
oil fields all also holding significant reserves.
To this day, revenues from the oil are surging
and increased focus on improving the value chain
of the oil, with new capabilities for refineries,
are increasing profit margins year over year.
Much of this wealth has been channeled into
the dramatic urban development visible across
Dubai and Abu Dhabi's skylines and coastlines,
establishing these cities as global centers
of commerce, tourism, and logistics.
However, noteworthy places to visit extend
beyond the shimmering skyscrapers and
artificial islands of these metropolitan
hubs. Opposing high-tech and modernism,
the 5 easternmost emirates of the Union preserve
a lot more of the traditional architecture and
Emirati heritage, bringing us to the last stop
of our journey around the United Arab Emirates.
Rising above Ras Al Khaimah, the easternmost
Emirati city on the Persian Gulf are the Hajar
Mountains. Although not particularly tall by
global standards, the contrast between them and
the endless desert to the west show quite the
contrasting stories. Located primarily within
Oman, the UAE controls an approximately 80
kilometer wide corridor connecting the Rub
al Khali Desert with the Gulf of Oman, cutting
off Musandam from the rest of Oman. Within this
stretch, most of the Emiratis land mammal
species thrive, including Arabian wolves,
foxes, and wildcats that inhabit the higher
elevations. Especially in the ungated wilderness
zones in the Hatta Region and the Wadi Wurayah
National Park these predators and their prey
live relatively undisturbed in low numbers.
With increased elevation, the intense desert
heat becomes a lot more tolerable with
the summits and high ridges experiencing a
consistent temperature difference of around
10°C compared to the surrounding desert
This also allows some vegetation to establish
themselves on the mountain slopes with Sidr,
Juniper and other fruit trees occurring naturally
at higher elevations. Another factor for their
survival is the increased rainfall which
is caused by orographic precipitation. The
sharp rise of the mountains from the Gulf of Oman
elevates hot and moist air from the Indian Ocean,
which cools down and condenses as it crosses the
Hajar Mountains, leading to occasional rainfall.
While modest by global standards, it is
significantly higher than in the western
desert. There are strong annual variations but
in wet years, precipitation over the mountains
can reach up to 400 to 500 mm per year which is
comparable to cities like Los Angeles or Madrid.
Despite the seasonal rain, rapid evaporation
prevents the formation of permanent streams
or natural lakes. Instead, the mountains are
drained by ephemeral streams called wadis,
which flow only during the rainy season. The
most significant examples include Wadi Bih,
which drains the northernmost section of the UAE,
and Wadi Wurayah, which carries water from the
central mountains eastward to the Gulf of Oman.
Zooming out a bit and adding the interior borders
of the UAE onto the map, the Western Hajar
mountains tell another interesting story
about their political subdivision. The cluster
of borders may appear like a dozen emirates being
spread across the mountains but the situation is a
bit more complicated than that. Five of the seven
Emirates, are holding territory in the Hajar
Mountains, yet not a single one of them forms
a continuous area. The most fractured of these
is Sharjah, which has its capital next to Dubai
along the Persian Gulf and then controls 5 more
disconnected territories in the Hajar Mountains.
The most peculiar of these enclaves is the village
of Nahwa, which is located entirely within Oman,
which itself again is an enclave entirely
surrounded by the UAE. While these rather chaotic
borders appear quite random at first glance, they
have quite the reasonable historical background,
and should have been applied in many more
instances across the globe. During the
formation of and delimitation of the UAE and its
subdivisions, tribal affiliations were preserved
and respected, creating this now unique mosaic.
The emirate with the largest share of the Hajar
Mountains is Ras Al Khaimah, spread over two
extensive areas. Within this mountainous domain
stands the region's crown jewel, the Jebel
Jais. Standing at 1,934 meters above sea level,
it represents the highest point of the Western
Hajar range. Although the peak itself lies
just across the border in Oman, the UAE's highest
elevation is found on Jebel Jais's western slopes
at 1,892 meters and presents a fitting culmination
to our journey through the United Arab Emirates.
Looking back down from the ridges of the
Hajar Mountains, the uninterrupted view
over the flat desert landscape with one
of the most challenging climates in the
world is a statement of human resilience and
adaptability. Transformed by recent oil wealth,
the Emirates have undergone
unprecedented development,
yet their future remains intricately tied
to both the finite oil reserves and the region's
harsh environmental constraints. As this small
nation continues to navigate between natural
limitations and ambitious modernization, its
geographical story remains far from complete.
If you want to see more mini documentaries
about the most extreme
places on planet earth, I can recommend this video
about the Geography of the Caucasus Mountains,
or watch what YouTube thinks is best for
you here. See you in the next one,
cheers.